hey this is pressure Locker with your
eyes closed you roll a pair of dice the
casino dealer announces that at least
one of the rolls is a one what is the
probability that both rolls show a one
give this problem a try and when you're
ready keep watching the video for the
solution the surprising result is the
probability is not 1/6 imagine the
casino offered this game with stakes if
you thought the probability was 1/6 then
you would be willing to offer a $1 bet
for a $6 payout that both dice were
showing the 1 you would think this is a
fair game but in fact you would be
losing money on average the casino
should actually be offering an $11
payout for this to be a fair game the
probability that both dice are showing
the 1 is actually much lower let's
calculate this when you roll a pair of
dice there are 36 equally likely
outcomes each die can show a number
between 1 & 6
this creates 36 different pairs when the
casino dealer announces that at least
one dice is showing a 1 we need to
eliminate all the different pairs which
do not include a 1 let's count the
number of pairs which do include a 1
there are 11 different pairs and these
are equally likely rolls to happen now
in ten of these events one of the dice
is showing a 1 and the other dice is not
a 1 in exactly one of the cases both of
the dice are showing a 1 therefore there
is a 1 in 11 chance or about a 9 point 1
percent probability that both dice are
showing a 1 this is a surprising result
and to give further evidence of this
we're going to do a numerical simulation
in a spreadsheet we're going to set up a
spreadsheet in which we do a numerical
estimation of the probability
we imagine rolling two dice labeled a
and B our sample space is the number of
trials in which at least one dice is
showing a 1 a success in our experiment
is a case in which both dice are showing
a 1 to roll a dice in a spreadsheet we
use the function ran between and we
generate a random number between 1 and 6
our sample space is the number of trials
in which at least one roll is showing a
1 so we're going to set up a formula
that at least one roll has to be equal
to 1 then we'll allow it in our sample
space count it with the 1 otherwise
we'll count it as a zero now we want to
see a success in which both dice are
showing a 1 so this both dice are
showing the one we're going to count
that as a success otherwise we exclude
it so this is one roll of the dice
neither of them show to one so we can
copy these formulas down and eventually
we'll get to a case in which one of the
dice is showing one so this formula
calculates that yes we're going to count
this in our sample space now to get an
accurate representation of the
probability we're gonna want to copy
this down many many times eventually
we'll get to a case in which both dice
are showing the 1 so I'm going to copy
this down and we're going to imagine
doing 10,000 rolls so now we can count
the number of times in which at least
one dice is showing a 1 this will be the
sum of the third column this is about
3,000 out of the 10,000 rolls and notice
this is approximately 30% which is about
the 11 over 36 that I was saying were
equally likely events we now want to
know the proportion of these cases in
which both rolls are showing a 1 this
will be the sum of the successes in the
fourth column this is about 270 so now
we can calculate the probability that
both rolls are one given at least
one is a 1 as the ratio of the successes
divided by the number of sample spaces
now this is nearly 9 percent and this is
roughly equal to the probability we
calculated of 1 divided by 11 so this
again justifies that 1 over 11 is the
correct probability did you figure it
out thanks for watching this video
please subscribe to my channel I make
videos on math and game theory you can
catch her on my blog mind your decisions
which you can follow on Facebook Google+
and patreon you can catch me on social
media at pressure Locker and if you
liked this video please check out my
books there are links in the video
description